[Music]
the first part of this ended really
abruptly and quickly or because my audio
failed so I apologize about that I'm
going to continue with the Infinity
Hotel explanation of the different kinds
of infinity that there are we've just
learned there are kinds of infinity
called countable infinities I'm about to
explain what the uncountable infinities
are but first I'll go to the book and
David writes it is mathematically
possible to overwhelm the capacity of
infinity hotel in a remarkable series of
discoveries in the 1870s cantle proved
among other things that not all
infinities are equal in particular the
infinity of the continuum the number of
points in a finite line which is the
same as the number of points in the
whole of space or space-time is much
larger than the infinity of the natural
numbers Cantor proved this by proving
that there can be no one-to-one
correspondence between the natural
numbers and the points in alone that set
of points has a higher order of infinity
then the set of natural numbers now
David then goes on to give a version of
that proof there are many versions of
the diagonal argument in showing that
certain kinds of infinity are bigger
than other kinds of infinity I'll go
through an explanation of a diagonal
argument and then go through another
kind of explanation or a description
really of how certain kinds of infinity
accountable and certain kinds are
uncountable let's have a look at a
certain kind of diagonal argument so if
you go online or you go to a textbook
and you look up what a diagonal argument
is what you'll often find is the
argument expressed in terms of binary
numbers let's have a look at how that
one might work so the simplest sequence
of binary numbers might be the binary
number for 0 and of course 0 would be
represented as
an infinite set of zeros or we could
have an infinite set of ones or we could
have alternating zeros and ones I'm not
really going to be concerned about what
these numbers actually represent in base
10 let's change the order of that
sequence maybe we could have two ones
two zeros for people listening on audio
basically I've got a sequence of nothing
but zeros then a sequence of nothing but
ones then I've got a sequence of
alternating 0 1 0 1 then I've got a
sequence of alternating 1 0 1 0 then
I've got a sequence of double 1 double 0
double 1 etc off to infinity you just
keep on repeating different patterns so
if you write down every single
permutation of zeros and ones in an
infinitely long list will you
nonetheless not be able to capture a
certain pattern of zeros and ones in
fact there is going to be even if this
list was infinitely long and so that you
went on such to your next sequence was
double zero double 1 double 0 double 1
and then triple 1 triple 0 triple 1
triple 0 and etc you just kept on doing
that and you try to shuffle around every
single possible way of writing zeros and
ones
is there a number that you could write
of zeros and ones that would not appear
in an infinitely long list ok heading
down that way yes there is there is such
a number it's this number take the very
first one which is nothing but a series
of zeros and take the first digit of
that number it's a zero or Circle it
what I'm going to do to that zero there
is to change it from being a zero into a
1 I'll write that off here now let's go
to the second number in my sequence and
that's just a series of ones I'm going
to take the second of those digits there
that's a Zeke that's a one and I'm going
to circle that and I'm going to change
it from what it is which is one into a
zero I'm going down to the third number
now and I'm gonna take the third number
on that list Circle it once more it
happens to be a zero I'm going to write
down a one and then on the fourth number
I think you get the picture now we're
going to find the fourth number in that
sequence Circle it and write down a 1
I'm going to repeat that for every
single number in the list off to
infinity and what I will have
constructed up here at the top is a
number which by definition is different
to every single other number in the list
so even though that number is infinitely
long even though that list is infinitely
long and would appear if it's an
infinitely long list such that every
single number in that list is different
to every other number and I've gone
through every possible permutation that
I can one would think that I have
constructed every single number that
could possibly be constructed from zeros
and ones but no because here by
definition at the top I've constructed a
number that does not is not identical to
any number in these lists it's different
by one digit from every single number in
this list it's different to this one
because it's got a one there instead
it's different at this one because got a
zero and said there no number down here
will be the same as that number I've
found a number that does not appear in
an infinitely long list of zeros and
ones where every single number in that
list is constructed of nothing but zeros
and ones so this is very profound this
says that this number here is not in the
list of the infinite numbers that are in
the bottom list so there must be a set
of numbers bigger than this countable
list and it's countable because it's
ordered okay there is a specific pattern
that we're following here this one
doesn't appear anywhere in an infinite
pattern it's a different kind of number
what kind of number is it well it's part
of a sequence of uncountable numbers it
doesn't appear in the countable set
there's another way of thinking about
this sometimes people can struggle with
the diagonal argument in trying to
understand the difference between
countable around
I find this version a little bit more
intuitive it's not a proof that there
exists uncountable infinities but I
think it's a clear explanation let's
think about any countable set there's
the classic countable set the set
sometimes called n for the natural
numbers sometimes zero is excluded so
we've got 0 1 2 3 4 etc that's countable
you can count 0 1 2 3 4 what else is
countable well any of your so called
times tables 0 2 4 6 8 etc 0 3 6 9 I
mentioned this in the previous video
now these sets are of the same size even
though it would appear that not every
element of the first set 0 1 2 3 4
appears in the second set 0 2 4 6 8 so
the second set is missing all the odd
numbers doesn't that mean it's missing
half of the numbers that are in the
first set both of them accountable okay
you you can you can count 2 4 6 8 10 3 6
9 12
they're both infinitely big now although
both of them are infinitely long and
infinitely large both of them are
smaller than other kinds of infinity in
particular the infinite number of
integers here counting number 0 1 2 3 4
is not as big as the number of numbers
we say in mathematics the number of real
numbers between 0 & 1 I'll say that
again there are more numbers between 0 &
1 then there are integers from 0 through
to infinity how does that make sense
well as I've said over and again 0 1 2 3
4 is countable what is not countable
what is an uncountably large number of
numbers are all the numbers between 0 &
1 let's see why let's write down 0 2 1
this is a continuum between 0 and 1
what's halfway 0.5 or the fraction 1
over 2 what's a bit smaller than what's
a bit smaller than 1/2
well 0.1 what's smaller than that 0.01
and smaller than that 0.001 and so on so
let's try and count the numbers between
0 & 1 0 what comes next
I certainly know what comes next down
here with the integers I can count them
0 1 2 3 4 but if I want to count the
real numbers all of the decimals let's
say between 0 & 1 I have no hope of even
starting I don't know where to begin
counting after zero zero zero point zero
zero one will know it's not that because
there's something even smaller than that
zero point zero zero zero zero zero one
and even smaller than that it doesn't
matter what number you pick however
small it is I can give you another
number that's smaller yet and that means
I cannot count the numbers between zero
and one it's an uncountably large
infinity therefore because the number of
members is so large that not only is it
infinite you can't even begin counting
them it's larger than the ones where at
least you've got a hope of beginning the
process towards infinity so that's an
intuitive way of trying to understand
the difference between countable and
uncountable large infinities okay after
that long digression let's go back to
the book David writes so there is an
uncountable infinity of real numbers
between any two distinct limits like 0 &
1 furthermore there are uncountably many
orders of infinity each too large to be
put into one-to-one correspondence with
the lower ones
another important uncountable set is the
set of all logically possible
reassignments of guests
two rooms in infinity hotel or as the
mathematicians put it all possible
permutations of the natural numbers and
so reordering the natural numbers in
different orders there's an uncountably
large number of those so I'm skipping a
bit here and going on to the story of
the puppy everyone likes the story of
the puppy it's not a real puppy we don't
have to worry David Wright's infinity
hotel has a unique self-sufficient waste
disposal system every day the management
first rearranged the guests in a way
that ensures that all rooms are occupied
then they make the following
announcement within the next minute will
all guests please bag their trash and
give it to the guests in the next higher
numbered room should you receive a bag
during that minute then pass it on
within the following 1/2 minute should
you receive a bag during that 1/2 minute
pass it on within the following quarter
minute and so on to comply the guests
have to work fast but none of them has
to work infinitely fast or handle
infinitely many bags each of them
performs a finite number of actions as
per the hotel rules after 2 minutes all
these trash moving actions have ceased
so 2 minutes after they begin none of
the guests has any trash left just by
the way why why did it take 2 minutes
well basically that's because there's
this sum that looks kind of like this
begin with one minute and then the next
thing we're taught to do is half a
minute and then next thing we'll do is
told to add a quarter of a minute and we
just keep having the previous number and
then adding together the entire sequence
now if you know how to add together
infinite sequences in ink that series of
numbers rather then you can figure this
out but if you don't then all you need
to do is to take out a calculator and
you will see that this series converges
to two and in fact you can prove that it
identically equals two but you can at
least demonstrate to yourself with
nothing but a calculator that sure
enough one plus 0.5 plus 0.25 plus 0.125
etc he is going to approach two so after
that process David writes all the trash
in the hotel has disappeared from the
universe it is nowhere no one has put it
in nowhere every guest has merely moves
of it to another room the nowhere where
all that trash is gone is called in
physics a singularity singularities may
well happen in reality inside black
holes and elsewhere but I digress
at the moment we are still discussing
mathematics not physics of course
infinity hotel has infinitely many staff
several of them are assigned to look
after each guest but the staff
themselves are treated as guests in the
hotel staying in numbered rooms and
receiving exactly the same benefits as
every other guest each of them has
several other staff assigned to their
welfare however they are not allowed to
ask those staff to do their work for
them that is because if they did this
the hotel would grind to a halt infinity
is not magic it has logical rules that
is the whole point of the Infinity Hotel
thought experiment
the fallacious idea of delegating all
one's work to other staff in higher
numbered rooms is called an infinite
regress it is one of the things that one
cannot validly do with infinity skipping
a little bit one day an infinity hotel a
guest's puppy happens to climb into a
trash bag the owner does not notice and
passes the bag with the puppy to the
next room within two minutes the puppy
is nowhere the distraught owner phones
the front desk
the receptionist announces over the
public address system we apologize for
the inconvenience but an item of value
is being inadvertently thrown away will
all guests please undo the trash moving
actions they have just performed in
reverse order starting as soon as you
receive a trash bag from the next higher
numbered room but to no avail
none of the guests returned any bags
because their fellow guests in the
higher numbered rooms are not returning
any either
it was no exaggeration to say that the
bags are nowhere they have not been
stuffed into a mythical room number
infinity they no longer exist nor does
the puppy no one has done anything to
the puppy except move it to another
numbered room within the hotel yet it is
not any room it is not anywhere in the
hotel or anywhere else in a finite hotel
if you move an object from room to room
in however complicated a pattern it will
end up in one of those rooms not so with
an infinite number of rooms every
individual action that the guests
performed was both harmless to the puppy
and perfectly reversible
yet taken together those actions are
niya later to puppy and cannot be
reversed reversing them cannot work
because if it did there would be no
explanation for why a puppy arrived at
its owners room and not a kitten if a
puppy did arrive the explanation would
have to be that a puppy was passed down
from the next higher numbered room and
so on but that hole infinite sequence of
explanations never gets around to
explaining why a puppy it is an infinite
regress what if one day a puppy did just
arrive at room 1 having been passed
today out down through all the rooms
that is not logically impossible it
would merely lack an explanation in
physics the nowhere from which a puppy
would have come is called a naked
singularity naked singularities appear
in some speculoos theories and physics
but such theories are rightly criticized
on the grounds they cannot make
predictions as Hawking once put it
television sets could come out of a
naked singularity it would be different
if there were a law of nature
determining what comes out for in that
case there would be no infinite regress
and the singularity would not be naked
the Big Bang may have been a singularity
of that relatively benign type I said
that the rooms are identical but they do
differ in one respect their room numbers
so given the types of tasks at the
management request from time to time the
low numbered rooms are the most
desirable for instance the guest in room
1 has the unique privilege never having
to deal with anyone else's trash moving
to room 1 feels like winning first prize
in a lottery moving to room 2 feels only
slightly lesser but every guest has a
room number that is uniquely close to
the beginning so every guest in the
hotel is more privileged than almost all
other guests the cliched politicians
promise to favor everyone can be honored
in infinity hotel every room is at the
beginning of infinity that is one of the
attributes of the unbounded growth of
knowledge - we are only just scratching
the surface we shall never be doing
anything else so there is no such thing
as a typical room number infinity hotel
every room number is untapped eclis
close to the beginning the intuitive
idea that there must be typical or
average members of any set of values is
false for infinite sets the same is true
of the intuitive ideas of rare and
common we might think
that half of all natural numbers are odd
and half even so that odd and even
numbers are equally common amongst the
natural numbers but consider the
following rearrangement and I'll write
this down up here it's me talking now
okay so this is the sequence that
more-or-less that David's written down
in the book and as we can see here all
we've done is move the odd numbers after
the even numbers such that we've got two
even numbers together and then we've got
an odd number so 1 2 4 3 6 8 5 10 12 7
and you can do that forever and this
would make it appear that the odd
numbers half as common as the even
numbers and it gets worse I mean what if
we were to write down something like
that we wrote down just the sequence of
even numbers all the way up to 20 and
then started writing the odd numbers 1
and then I did 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36
38 43 what would that mean that the odd
numbers in our 1/10 is common as the
even numbers we could do it every
millionth every millionth number we
could write down an odd number and the
rest could be even numbers and we'd
never run out of either what does this
mean that's quite profound
I'll read the section where David
remarks on precisely that that makes it
look as though the odd numbers are only
half as coming as the even ones
similarly we could make it look as
though the odd numbers were one in a
million or any other proportion so the
intuitive notion of a proportion of the
members of a set does not necessarily
apply to infinite sets either now David
moves on to the discussion about
probability and so let's read that
section here he writes after the
shocking loss of the puppy the
management of infinity Hotel want to
restore the morale of guests so they
arranged a surprise they announce that
every guests were receive a
complimentary copy of either the
beginning of infinity or his previous
book the fabric of reality they
distribute them as follows they dispatch
a copy of the older book to every
millionth room and a copy of the newer
book to every to each remaining room ok
so we've got the fabric of reality in
one out of every million rooms
apparently supposed to are a guest at
the hotel a book gift wrapped in opaque
paper appears in your rooms delivery
chute you are hoping that it will be the
new book because you have already read
the old book you're fairly confident
that it will be because after all what
are the chances that your room is one of
those that receive the old book exactly
one in a million it would seem but
before you have a chance to open the
package there is an announcement
everyone is to change rooms to a number
designated on a card that will come
through the chute the announcement also
mentions the new allocation will move
all the recipients of one of the books
to odd-numbered rooms and the recipients
of the other book to even-numbered rooms
but it does not say which so you cannot
tell from your new room number which
book you have received of course there
is no problem with filling the rooms in
this manner both books had infinitely
many recipients your card arrives and
you move to your new room they you now
any less sure about which of the two
books you have received presumably not
by your previous reasoning there is now
only a one in two chance your book is
the beginning of infinity because it is
now in half the rooms since that is a
contradiction your method of assessing
those probabilities must have been wrong
indeed all methods of assessing them are
wrong because as this example shows in
infinity hotel there is no such thing as
the probability that you have received
one book or the other okay so this is me
talking now this is a profound insight
into the nature of probability and how
it cannot apply to infinite sets what we
had here was a thought experiment that
city set had set things up such that it
appeared as if one out of every million
rooms in infinity hotel had a copy of
the fabric of reality and the rest had
the beginning of infinity and so you
would presume on the basis in which it
is stated that the probability of you
going into a random room into infinity
hotel that you would find the beginning
of infinity because it seems like far
more of those rooms have the begin the
the beginning of infinity however once
the instruction comes through
that everyone who received let's say the
beginning me infinity is to move to an
even-numbered room and everyone who
received the fabric of reality was to
move to an odd-numbered room then in
performing that exact action you now
move to one of the rooms but you don't
know which one it is all you know is
that you have moved into either an
odd-numbered room and an even-numbered
room and the odd-numbered rooms contain
beginning infinity and the even-numbered
rooms contain the fabric of reality but
that seems to conflict with what you
already assumed which is one out of
every million one out of every million
rooms contains the fabric of reality and
now it appears as though one in two
rooms contains the fabric of reality how
do we square these two things we square
these two things because that way that
intuition of thinking about
probabilities as applied to infinite
sets doesn't work I'll continue reading
David writes mathematically this is
nothing momentous the example merely
demonstrates again that the attributes
probable or improbable rare or common
typical or untypical have literally no
meaning in regard to comparing infinite
sets of natural numbers but when we turn
to physics it is bad news for anthropic
arguments imagine infinite set of
universes all with the same laws of
physics except at one particular
physical constant let's call it D has a
different value in H strictly speaking
we should imagine an uncountable
infinity of universes like those
infinitely thin cards but that only
makes the problem I am about to describe
worse so let us keep things simple
assume that of these universes
infinitely many have values of D that
produce astrophysicists and infinitely
many have values that do not then let us
number the universes in such a way that
all those with astrophysicists have even
numbers and all the ones without
astrophysicists have odd numbers I'll
just pause there before I go on now why
would David talk about having a constant
that leads to astrophysicists well
people involved in or interested in SETI
or who write about the possibility of
intelligent life out there they often
confined their discussions
how do we detect astrophysicists why on
earth would that be the measure of
finding intelligence out there well if
you're looking for intelligence the best
way that we know currently according to
the SETI project anyway is to listen to
listen to in particular radio signals
coming from deep space geo signals and
if you're listening for radio signals
you're probably listening for people who
are deliberately sending them in our
direction and they'd probably be some
kind of astrophysics or it's using some
other astrophysics technology okay
anyway I'll continue reading this does
not mean that half the universes have
astrophysicists
just as with the book distribution in
infinity hotel we can equally well label
the universes so that only every third
universe or every trillionth one had
astrophysicists or that every trillionth
one did not so there is something wrong
with the anthropic explanation of the
fine-tuning problem we can always make
fine-tuning go away just by relabeling
the universes at our whim we can number
them in such a way that astrophysicists
seem to be the rule or the exception or
anything in between now suppose that we
calculate using the relevant laws of
physics with different values of D
whether astrophysicists will emerge we
find that for values of D outside the
range from say 137 to 138 those that
contain astrophysicists are very sparse
only one in a trillion such universes
has astrophysicists okay this is a
complete diversion by me but it's an
area I'm interested in so indulge me for
a moment
the choice of 137 to 138 is no accident
the 137 to 138 is actually the
reciprocal of what is known as the
fine-structure constant and so I'll just
mention that very very quickly as to
what the fine-structure constant is for
anyone else who happens to be interested
in astrophysics so the fine-structure
constant is known as an alpha and alpha
is unique not unique okay it's but it's
special because it is something called a
dimensionless constant a dimensionless
constant and it's actually a constant
that's made up of other
really cool Constance so the charge on
an electron squared divided by Planck's
constant multiplied by the speed of
light now the dimensions of that well it
has it's dimensionless because it has no
unit so this isn't in terms of meters
per Coulomb or kilograms or anything
like that the constants all cancel out
and so you end up with just a number and
what's often used is one over alpha and
one over alpha happens to have the value
very close to 137 it's I think it is
it's checking the internet right now
137 point zero three five it's known
very precisely nine nine nine zero seven
four and the fine-structure constant
among other things determines the
strength of the electromagnetic force
and the uncertainty in this number here
is extremely small so we can measure the
fine-structure constant really well it's
called the fine-structure constant
because when you look at things like
emission spectra made up of these bright
lines when you pass light let's say
coming from a star through something you
through a telescope and then through a
thing called a spectroscope and you
split it up into all the colors of the
rainbow or whatever the colors coming
from the star happen to be you notice
that there is fine structure to those
lines and the fine-structure constant
gives us a way of the distance between
these lines it can give us a measure of
what the fine-structure constant
actually is and so we can measure the
fine-structure constant here in the
laboratory on earth in stars that are
near to us in the galaxy and in stars
and quasars on the other side of the
universe and this is what certain
astrophysicist they're trying to measure
whether or not the fine-structure
constant has changed over time because
if it did that would suggest something
more a rather remarkable it would
suggest that the laws of physics are not
precisely the same here on earth as they
are on the other side of the universe
for a while there we thought we had
found a difference in the fine-structure
constant but the fact is that that was
shown to be systematic error in the
experiment but if the fine-structure
constant was changing then the
explanation for a changing
fine-structure constant over time could
mean that Planck's constant had changed
the speed of light had changed or that
the charge the elementary charge on an
electron had changed any one of those
three things would be remarkable perhaps
all three could be changing but the
simple fact is it's rather boring
conclusion at the moment there is no
such evidence for a changing
fine-structure constant so that's where
the number 137
I'm guessing has come from it doesn't
seem like an accident to me all right
okay so just repeat what I've what I
read there David wrote we find that for
values of d outside the range of 137 to
138 those that contain astrophysicists
are very sparse only one in a trillion
such universities astrophysicists within
the range only one and a trillion does
not have astrophysicists and for values
of D between one 37.4 and 1 37.6 they
all do okay so this seem to suggest that
the value of D alpha um is key to
whether or not a particular universe
it's going to have astrophysics going to
have the conditions right faster or
fiercest let's keep on moving David
writes let me stress that in real life
we do not understand the process of
astrophysicists formation remotely well
enough to calculate such numbers and
perhaps we never shall as I shall
explain in the next chapter but whether
we could calculate them or not and
tropic theorists would wish to interpret
such numbers as mean that if we measure
D we are unlikely to see values outside
the range from 137 to 138 but they mean
no such thing where we could just real
able the universes shuffle the infinite
pack of cards to make the spacings
exactly the other way around or anything
else we liked so this is really
important for people interested in
questions about fine structure as a
layperson I am interested in that
question there's been a lot of books
written on this topic and this is a an
important
fact to keep in mind that many people
have written books on this topic
do not grapple with that there is this
mathematical argument about the way in
which we can order this infinite set
that just because we find outside of the
range for some particular constant that
it is highly unlikely apparently for
something like astrophysicists to emerge
to evolve to be possible in those
universes a reordering of that infinite
set because when we're talking about
possible universes with different
physical laws what we're actually
talking about is a class of universes an
uncountably large class of universes and
so we could reorder those universes in
whatever order we like such that the
astrophysicists appear probable or
improbable okay and then David goes on
and he talks about lis Smolin's idea
about how black holes could themselves
give rise to new universes which is an
interesting idea I'm going to skip
almost all of that I'm going yes I'm
going to skip all of that and just move
right to the end of this section not
this chapter with this section where
David writes none of the anthropic
reasoning theories that have been
proposed to solve the fine-tuning
problem provides any such measure most
of most are hardly more than
speculations of the form what if there
were universes with different physical
constants there is however one theory in
physics that already describes a
multiverse for independent reasons all
its universes have the same constants of
physics and the interactions of those
universes do not involve travel to or
measurement of each other but it does
provide a measure for universes that
theory is quantum theory which I shall
discuss in Chapter 11 skipping a very
short part and David writes infinite
means something like bigger than any
finite combination of finite things but
that in formal motion is rather circular
unless we have some independent idea of
what makes something finite and what
makes a single act
combination finite the intuitive answer
would be anthropocentric something is
definitely finite if it could in
principle be encompassed by a human
experience but what does it mean to
experience something was Kanter
experiencing infinity when he proved
theorems about it or is he experiencing
any symbols but we only ever experience
symbols one can avoid this
anthropocentrism by referring instead to
measuring instruments our quantity is
definitely neither infinite nor
infinitesimal if it could in principle
register on some measuring instrument
however by that definition a quantity
can be finite even if the underlying
explanation refers to an infinite set in
a mathematical sense to display the
result of a measurement the needle on a
meter might move by one centimeter which
is a finite distance but it consists of
an uncountable infinity infinity of
points this can happen because although
points appear in lowest level
explanations of what is happening the
number of points never appears in
predictions just pausing there just to
highlight that that will become
important in a moment when we get to the
paradoxes of xeno so I'll say that again
that although points appear in lowest
level explanations of what is happening
the number of points never appears in
predictions continuing physics deals in
distances not numbers of points
similarly Newton and Leibnitz were able
to use infinitesimal distances to
explain physical quantities like
instantaneous velocity yet there is
nothing physically infinitesimal or
infinite inside the continuous motion of
a projectile skipping a little again and
then David writes only the laws of
physics determine what is finite in
nature failure to realize this is often
caused confusion the paradoxes of Zeno
of Elea such as that of the Achilles and
the tortoise were early examples Zeno
managed to conclude that in a race
against a tortoise Achilles will never
ever take the tortoise if it has a head
start because by the time Achilles
reaches the point where the tortoise
began the tortoise will have moved on a
little by the time he reaches that new
point it will moves on a little further
and so on ad infinitum
thus the catching-up procedure requires
a Callisto
an infinite number of catching up steps
in a finite time which as a finite being
he presumably cannot do so I'll pause
there let's refer back to what was just
said physics deals in distances not
number of points this is the problem
this is the solution to Zeno of Elyas
conundrum that he was in now I used to
argue that there were two ways of going
about this on the one hand you can talk
about adding up that I had that sequence
up before that let's say you want to
traverse a total distance of two meters
well first you have to walk one meter
and then you have to walk 0.5 meters and
then 0.25 meters and then 0.125 meters
etc and so it would appear that given
that each individual step taken takes a
finite amount of time and there's an
infinite number of steps then no matter
how short the amount of time given
there's an infinite number of steps
required each requiring a infinite
amount a finite amount of time it's
going to take an infinite amount of time
to move two meters that would appear to
be xenos argument the mathematical
argument is well you can add up 1 plus
0.5 plus 0.25 plus 0.125 etc etc and get
to 2 similarly all you're really arguing
is that you're taking your 2 meters or
whatever it happens to be the distance
of 2 and you're splitting it up and into
an infinite number of points the
resolution to any of these two anytime
we have a supposed paradox of being able
to move through an infinite number of
points but each step along the way
taking a finite amount of time adding up
to an infinite amount of time therefore
making motion impossible is that you're
not physics is not does not deal in
infinite numbers of points physics deals
and distances and if you want to get
from point A to point B that's a
distance and that will take you a
certain amount of time what's not going
on is you actually taking time to go an
infinite number of points that's the
correct
the incorrect way of putting the problem
let's return to the book which explains
it far more clearly than I did did you
see what Xena did there he just presumed
that the mathematical notion that
happens to be called infinity faithfully
captures the distinction between finite
and infinite that is relevant to that
physical situation that is simply false
if he is complaining that the
mathematical notion of infinity does not
make sense then we can refer him to
cantle who showed that it does if he is
complaining that the physical event of
Achilles overtaking the tortoise does
not make sense then he is claiming that
the laws of physics are inconsistent but
they are not but if he is complaining
that there is something inconsistent
about motion because one could not
experience each point along a continuous
path then he is simply confusing two
different things that both happen to be
called infinity there is nothing more to
all these paradoxes than that mistake
what Achilleas can or cannot do is not
deducible from mathematics
it depends only on what the relevant
laws of physics say if they say he will
overtake the tortoise in a given time
then overtake it II will if there
happens to involve an infinite number of
steps of the form moved to a particular
location that an infinite number of such
steps will happen if it involves his
passing through an uncountable infinity
of points than that is what he does but
nothing physically infinite has happened
thus the laws of physics determine the
distinction not only between rare and
common probable and improbable
fine-tuned or not but even between
finite and infinite just as the same set
of universes can be packed with
astrophysicists when measured under one
set of laws of physics but ever almost
none when measured under another so
exactly the same sequence of events can
be finite or infinite depending upon
what the laws of physics are xenos
mistake has been made with various other
mathematical abstractions too in general
terms the mistake is to confuse an
abstract attribute with the physical one
of the same name since it is possible to
prove theorems about the mathematical
attribute which have the status of
absolutely necessary truths then one is
misled into assuming that one possesses
a priori knowledge about what the laws
of physics must say about the physical
attribute
pausing there David mentions absolutely
necessary physical truths as he says in
the fabric of reality as he says in this
chapter very shortly and as he said in
his Dirac metal award ceremony speech
the mathematics mathematicians
misconception was a common theme amongst
David's work absolutely necessary truths
exist and that is what mathematics is
the study of but our knowledge of those
absolutely necessary truths are not
absolutely necessary truths ok that
sounds too clever by half but all it
means is that our knowledge of anything
is fallible and even though mathematics
is a study of things that are not
fallible just as in physics our study of
the laws of physics and the study of
things that are perfect the laws of
physics are perfect in some sense
they're they're out there they are they
have a certain final form they are the
laws that govern the universe they are
fixed immutable our knowledge of those
laws are not those laws the knowledge
and the thing in reality are two quite
different things so we are always
fallible out the knowledge that we
produce is always error-prone which
contains errors but it can be about
things that are absolutely necessarily
true
I'm skipping a fair bit more of this
chapter now I'm skipping a significant
part again now and we're moving on to a
section about the relationship between
computation and mathematics and physics
David writes cheering initially set up
the theory of computation not for the
purpose of building computers but to
investigate the nature of mathematical
proof Hilbert in 1900 had challenged
mathematicians to formulate a rigorous
theory of what constitutes a proof and
one of his conditions was that proofs
must be finite they must use only a
fixed and finite set of rules of
inference they must start with a finite
number of finitely expressed axiom
and there must contain only a finite
number of elementary steps where the
steps themselves are finite computations
has understood ensuring theory are
essentially the same thing as proofs
every valid proof can be converted into
a computation that computes the
conclusion from the premises and every
correctly executed computation is a
proof that the output is the outcome of
the given operations of the input in our
computation can be thought of as
computing a function that takes an
arbitrary natural number as its input
and delivers an output that that depends
in a particular way on that input so for
instance doubling a number is a function
Infinity Hotel typically tells guests to
change rooms by specifying a function
and telling them and telling them all to
compute it with different inputs their
room numbers one of hearings conclusions
was that almost all mathematical
functions that exist logically cannot be
computed by any program they are non
computable for the same reason that most
logically possible reallocations of
rooms infinity hotel cannot be affected
by any instruction by the management the
set of all functions is uncountably
infinite while the set of all programs
is merely countably infinite that is
wide as meaningful to say that almost
all members of the infinite set of
functions have a particular property and
also as the mathematician code girdle
had discovered using a different
approach to Hilbert challenge almost all
mathematical truths have no proofs they
are unprovable truths it also follows
that almost all mathematical statements
are undecidable there is no proof that
they are true and no proof that they are
false each of them either is true or
false but there is no way of using
physical objects such as brains or
computers to discover which is which the
laws of physics provide us only with a
narrow window through which we can look
out on the world of abstractions all
undecidable statements are directly or
indirectly about infinite sets to the
opponents of infinity in mathematics
this is due to the meaninglessness of
such statements but to me it is a
powerful argument our cost at a 6-4 1-6
hundred forty one argument that
abstractions exist objectively for it
means that the truth value of an
undecidable statement is certainly not
just a convenient way of describing a
behavior of some physical object like
peuta or a collection of dominoes
interestingly very few questions are
known to be undecidable even though most
are and i sure a turn to that point but
there are many unsolved mathematical
conjectures and some of those may well
be undecidable
take for instance two prime pairs
conjecture a prime pair is a pair of
numbers that differ by two such as 5 and
7 the conjecture is that there is no
largest prime pair that there are
infinitely many of them suppose for the
sake of argument that is undecidable
using our physics under many other laws
of physics it is decidable the laws of
infinity hotel are an example again the
details of how the management would
settle the prime pairs issue are not
essential to my argument but I present
them here for the benefit of
mathematically minded readers okay so
I'll go through this briefly and then
I'll explain a little about at least my
interpretation of what I think the point
is here about how if the laws of physics
were different or given that the laws of
physics we do have in this universe how
we can prove different things based upon
the laws of physics so the laws of
physics are in some sense prior they are
the things that permit what can possibly
be predicted within our universe and
given another universe with different
but Marino a universe of different laws
entirely we could prove different things
ok so David writes this is how you would
prove the prime pairs conjecture in a
different universe namely the universe
in which we find infinity hotel David
writes the management would announce
first please check within the next
minute whether your room number and the
number 2 above it are both primes next
if they are send a message back through
lowered numbered rooms saying that you
have found a prime pair use the usual
method for sending rapid messages allow
one minute for the first step and
thereafter each step must be completed
in half the time of the previous one
store a record of this message in the
lowest numbered room that is not already
storing a record of our previous such
next check with the room numbered one
more than yours if that guest is not
storing such a record as you are then
send the message to room 1 saying there
is a largest prime pair okay at the end
of 5 minutes the management would know
the truth of the prime pair's conjecture
so there is nothing mathematically
special about the undecidable questions
the non computable functions the
unprovable propositions they are
distinguished by physics only different
physical laws would make different
things infinite different things
computable different truths both
mathematical and scientific knowable it
is only the laws of physics that
determine which abstract entities and
relationships are modelled by physical
objects such as mathematicians brains
computers and sheets of paper so what we
saw there if we've got an infinity hotel
which does not obey the laws of physics
we could prove the prime fares
conjecture which we have no proof of
here and which well maybe undecidable in
infinity hotel why does it have
different laws of physics for one thing
is an infinite number of steps it can be
completed which requires energy in a
finite amount of time within 5 minutes
we can do an infinite number of steps
and presumably we're moving also as we
get towards the end of the computation
well beyond the speed of life
asymptotically close to infinite speed
that violates many laws of physics
number one probably number one it
exceeds the speed of light number two it
violates conservation of energy the
faster that we start to move the more
our momentum increases in our mass
increase and the energy required to
complete these this is relativity right
the more the more energy required in
order to move faster and faster and
faster we can't do any of this this is
why Infinity Hotel has different
physical laws skipping a little again
and David Rives
but if the laws of physics were in fact
different from what we currently think
they are then so might be the set of
mathematical truths we would then be
able to prove and so might the Opera
rations that would be available to prove
them with the laws of physics as we know
them happen to afford a privileged
status to such operations as not and and
or acting on individual bits of
information binary digits or logical
truth true false values that is why
those operations seem natural elementary
and final to us and why bit two if the
laws of physics were like say those of
infinity hotel there will be no
additional privileged operations acting
on infinite sets of bits with some other
laws of physics the operations not end
and all would be non computable why some
of our non computable functions would
seem natural
elementary and finite that brings me to
another distinction that depends on the
laws of physics simple versus complex
brains are physical objects thoughts are
computations of the types permitted
under the laws of physics some
explanations can be grasped quickly and
easily like if Socrates was a man and
Plato is a man then both were men this
is easy because it can be stated in a
short sentence and relies on the
properties of an elementary operation
namely and other explanations are
inherently hard to grasp because their
shortest form is still long and depends
on many such operations but whether the
form of an explanation is long or short
whether it requires few or many
elementary operations depends entirely
on the laws of physics under which it is
being stated and understood quantum
computation which is currently believed
to be the fully universal form of
computation happens to have exactly the
same set of computable functions as
chewings classical computation but
quantum computation drives a cogent
horses through the classical notion of
simple or elementary operation it makes
some intuitively very complex things
simple moreover the elementary
information storing entity and quantum
computation the qubit quantum bit is
quite hard to explain in non quantum
terminology meanwhile the bit is a
fairly complicated object from the
perspective of quantum physics I'll just
pause there just a very brief comment on
that section there where David wrote
quantum computation which is currently
believed to be the fully universal form
of computation happens to have exactly
the same set of computable functions
chewings classical computation that's an
important note to make about quantum
computation there is this misconception
out there the quantum computers can
actually compute a wider range have a
greater repertoire of different
computations than cheering's computation
does and that is incorrect
a Turing universal Turing computer can
compute anything that a quantum computer
can
it's just that in many many cases the
children computer would take even if it
was operating at switching speeds at the
speed of light and it had infinite
memory and the entire universe was a
classical computer it wouldn't be able
to reach the end of that computation you
know within trillions of years so
although it could do it given an
infinite amount of time you know it'll
eventually get to the end of the
computation clearly wouldn't be a
feasible computation it's not efficient
for certain types of problems the
quantum computer is more efficient for
certain kinds of problems than what the
classical computer is they can both
complete they can both compute the same
overall number of kinds of computation
okay they both operate on laws of
physics in this universe so the set of
all possible computations is the same
for both classical and quantum computers
but the quantum computers a faster are
faster much faster for a certain set of
computations ok so skipping a bit and
David returns to a discussion about the
mathematicians misconception I really
like this stuff because it is such a
misconception and I don't think it's
just the mathematicians misconception
it's mathematics teachers misconception
and therefore it's mathematic students
misconception and therefore it's
everyone's misconception because
everyone's been indoctrinated with this
stuff at school so let me read through
what is said here whether a mathematical
proposition is true or not is indeed
independent of physics but the proof of
such a proposition is a matter of
physics only
there is no such thing as abstractly
proving something just as there is no
such thing as abstractly knowing
something mathematical truth is
absolutely necessary and transcendent
but all knowledge is generated by
physical processes and its scope and
limitations are conditioned by the laws
of nature one can define a class of
abstract entities and call them proofs
or computations just as one can define
abstract entities and call them
triangles and of them obey Euclidean
geometry but you cannot infer anything
from that theory of triangles about what
angle you will turn through if you walk
around a closed path consisting of three
straight lines nor can those proofs do
the job of verifying mathematical
statements a mathematical theory of
proofs has no bearing on which truths
can or cannot be proved in reality I'll
be known in reality and similarly a
theory of abstract computation has no
bearing on what can or cannot be
computed in reality so a computation or
a proof is a physical process in which
objects such as computers or brains
physically model or instantiate abstract
entities like numbers or equations and
mimic their properties it is our window
on the abstract it works because we use
such entities only in situations where
you have good explanations saying that
the relevant physical variables in those
objects do indeed instantiate those
abstract properties
consequentially the reliability of our
knowledge of mathematics remains forever
subsidiary to that of our knowledge of
physical reality every mathematical
proof depends absolutely for its
validity on our being right about the
rules that govern the behavior of some
physical objects like computers or ink
and paper or brains so contrary to what
Hilbert thought and contrary to what
most mathematicians since antiquity of
believed and believed to this day proof
Theory can never be made into a branch
of mathematics proof theory is a science
specifically it is computer science the
whole motivation for seeking a perfectly
secure foundation for mathematics was
mistaken it was a form of justification
ISM mathematics is characterized by its
use of proofs in the same way that
science has character it's characterized
by its use of experimental testing in
neither case is that the object of the
exercise the object of mathematics is to
understand or explain abstract
these proof is primarily a means of
ruling out false explanations and
sometimes it also provides mathematical
truths that need to be explained but
like all fields in which progress is
possible mathematics seeks not random
truths but good explanations three
closely related ways in which the laws
of physics seem fine-tuned are they
named all expressible in terms of a
single finite set of elementary
operations they all share uniform
distinction between finite and infinite
and their predictions can all be
computed by a single physical object a
universal classical computer but to
simulate physics efficiently one would
need a one would in general need a
quantum computer it is because the laws
of physics support computational
universality that human brains can
predict and explain the behavior of very
unhuman objects like quasars
and it is because of that same
universality that mathematicians like
Hilbert can build up an intuition of
proof and mistakenly think that it is
independent of physics it is not
independent of physics it is merely a
universal in the physics that governs
our world if the physics of quasars will
like the physics of infinity hotel and
dependent upon the functions that we
call non computable then we could not
make predictions about them unless we
could build computers out of quasars or
other objects relying on the relevant
laws with the laws of physics slightly
more exotic than with laws of physics
slightly more exotic than that we would
not be able to explain anything and
hence could not exist so there's
something special infinitely special it
seems about the laws of physics as we
find them something exceptionally
computation friendly prediction friendly
an explanation friendly the physicists
Eugene Wigner called this the
unreasonable effectiveness of
mathematics in the Natural Sciences for
the reasons I have given anthropic
argument alone cannot explain it
something else will David then goes
through bad explanations for what
explains the unreasonable effectiveness
of mathematics and Natural Sciences
including of course the simulation
argument this is the argument that we're
living inside of a simulation and
because a simulation would be based on
software which is mathematical in nature
we should therefore expect there
mathematics works inside of nature which
is of course just a simulation and this
explains it
and that of course is a bad explanation
it's an infinite regress because what we
really want to know is well we want to
understand reality and so our question
then is simply moved off it's like the
God explanation it's like well if God
created the universe who created God and
apparently not allowed asked that
question well if we're a simulation on
what computer are we running what's the
code who's running this computer who
built this computer well the same answer
we can ask that because it's beyond the
universe but these are bad explanations
ok they're not explanations they are
moving the problem from where it
actually is off to a supernatural realm
so I'm going to skip that section but I
encourage everyone to read it David
writes about the limitations about what
we can know and he says how do all those
drastic limitations on what can be known
and what can be achieved by mathematics
and by computation including the
existence of the undecidable questions
in mathematics square with the maxim the
problems are soluble but problems are
conflicts between ideas both method with
most mathematical questions that exist
abstractly never appear as the subject
of such a conflict they are never the
subject of curiosity never the focus of
conflicting misconceptions about some
attribute of the world about some
attribute of the world of abstractions
in short most of them are uninteresting
moreover recall that finding proofs is
not the purpose of mathematics it is
merely one of the methods of mathematics
the purpose is to understand and the
overall method as in all fields is to
make conjectures and to criticize them
according to how good they are as
explanations one does not understand a
mathematical proposition merely by
proving it true this is why there are
such things as and mathematics lectures
rather than just lists of proofs and
conversely the lack of a proof does not
necessarily prevent a proposition from
being understood on the contrary the
usual order of events is for them that
mathematician first to understand
something about the abstraction in
question and then to use that
understanding to conjecture how true
propositions about the abstraction might
be proved and then to prove them a
mathematical theorem can be proved
yet remain forever uninteresting and an
unproven mathematical injection could be
fruitful in providing explanations even
if it remains unproved for centuries or
even if it is undecidable one such
example is the conjecture known in the
jargon of computer science as P does not
equal NP it is roughly speaking there
exist classes of mathematical questions
whose answers can be verified
efficiently once one has them but cannot
be computed efficiently in the first
place by a universal classical computer
efficient computation is a technical
definition that roughly approximates to
what we mean by the phrase in practice
almost all researchers in computing
theory sure that the conjecture is true
which is further refutation of the idea
that mathematical knowledge consists
only of proofs this is because although
no proof is known there are fairly good
explanations of why we should expect it
to be true and none to the contrary and
so the same is thought to hold for
quantum computers moreover a vast amount
of mathematical knowledge that is both
useful and interesting has been built on
the conjecture it includes theorems of
the form if the conjecture is true then
this interesting can consequence follows
and there are fewer but still
interesting theorems about what would
follow if it were true skipping a little
bit date so David is emphasizing here
how even there are problems in there are
there are there are statements that one
can write down in mathematics that are
understandable we don't know if they're
true or false and there are true things
in mathematics that we can't prove us
true this doesn't present a problem at
all for the claim that problems are
soluble in fact he writes undecidability
no more contradicts the maxim that
problems are soluble then does the fact
that there are truths about the physical
world that we shall never know I expect
that one day we shall have the
technology to measure the number of
grains of sand on earth exactly but I
doubt we shall ever know what the exact
number was in Archimedes time indeed
I've already mentioned more drastic
limitations on what can be known
achieved there are direct limitations
imposed by the universal laws of physics
we cannot exceed the speed of light and
so on then there are the limits of
epistemology we cannot create knowledge
open by the fallible method of
criticism errors are inevitable and only
error correcting processes can succeed
or continue for long
none of this contradicts the maxim
because none of those limitations need
ever cause a nun resolve the conflict of
explanations hence I conjecture that in
mathematics as well as in science and
philosophy if the question is
interesting then the problem is soluble
fallibilism tells us that we can be
mistaken about what is interesting and
so three corollary is follow from this
conjecture the first is that inherently
insoluble problems are inherently
uninteresting the second is that in the
long run the distinction between what is
interesting and what is boring is not a
matter of subjective taste but an
objective fact
and the third corollary is that the
interesting problem of why every problem
that is interesting is also soluble is
itself soluble at present we do not know
why the laws of physics ain't fine-tuned
we do not know why the various forms of
universality exist but we do know many
of the connections between them we do
not know why the world is explicable but
eventually we shall and when we do there
will be infinitely more left to explain
the most important of all limitations on
knowledge creation is that we cannot
prophesy we cannot predict the content
of ideas yet to be created or their
effects the limitation is not only
consistent with the unlimited growth of
knowledge it is entailed by it as I
shall explain and next chapter I'll
pause there I saw an advertisement for
David Attenborough's latest documentary
love David Attenborough great love
watching his documentaries as David
mentioned later in the book David
Attenborough went to something that was
terribly pessimistic and and many nature
documentaries now are terribly
pessimistic and the crux of one of the
latest documentaries that David
Attenborough has and in fact it's a
common theme now running through David
Attenborough documentaries wonderful as
they are is the natural world is swiftly
coming to an end all the world is coming
to an end that we are doomed that
something needs to be done in order to
prevent the virus that is human beings
and technology and progress from
destroying our world in particular when
it comes to the very real problem of
climate change and the increasing
temperature and the melting of Greenland
and the melting of Antarctica and rising
sea levels I'm like David I am NOT an
expert in this but I am happy as I would
be if I went to a neurologist and asked
if I had cancer and the urologist said
here are all the reasons why you do I
believe that the urologist has gone
through sufficient training and error
correction and has a good standard of
trying to figure out the truth of the
situation because I understand what the
process is that has led to the diagnosis
of me having cancer I in the same way
think that the processes of all these
scientists these climate scientists and
physicists and geologists and people who
are checking the data have gotten the
data right I can't check all the data I
could spend the time to go and check the
data if I wanted to it doesn't seem of
all the problems that are out there I am
NOT animated that this is one of the
most pressing problems of all there are
many many pressing problems from
terrorism to the Sun suddenly doing
something that we didn't expect
viruses natural disasters earthquakes
floods there there are many many many
problems ok so yes absolutely
anthropocentric climate change is a real
thing and something should be done about
it the problem that many of us have with
the way in which people are responding
to anthropocentric climate change is
encapsulated there in that paragraph so
I just want to read it again
it says the most important of all
limitations
knowledge creation is that we cannot
prophesy we cannot predict the content
of ideas yet to be created Lear effects
so what it's got to do with climate
change at the moment the overwhelming
majority of purported solutions to
climate change and this goes all the way
back to when David gave his first TED
talk I mean this is a decade now and no
progress seems to have happened the the
solution appears to be to slow progress
literally to slow progress so taxation
on sources of energy to migrate from
cheap energy that works to more
expensive energy that pollutes less but
this is not claimed to actually solve
climate change although it is sold as
that anyone can look up the modeling
that if we were to reduce our use of
fossil fuels by 50 percent which is
highly unlikely then the temperature of
the earth will still increase because
the amount of carbon dioxide will still
increase if we were to eliminate all
fossil fuel use which would cost more
money than possibly the globe has but
let's say we did the temperature would
still increase the polar ice claps woods
polar ice caps would still melt the sea
levels would rise so these are not
solutions so what should we do well one
thing we should do is to actively cool
the globe this is what geoengineering is
about this would take energy we could
manufacture mirrors and put them in
space this would take energy
this will take fossil fuels but possibly
more importantly we don't know if the
solution is if the problem is the
temperature is rising too much right
into high such that therefore the
solution is reduce the temperature then
what we need is knowledge about how to
do that knowledge production requires
energy
the
more knowledge we can produce the faster
the completion the cheaper and more
efficiently we can produce it the better
we don't know how we're going to figure
out fusion I would hedge my bets and say
Fusion is physically possible here on
earth in fact it has to be possible we
know it's possible on the Sun so if we
could figure out a way to do it on earth
fantastic there are people working on
fusion power once we have small fusion
reactors here on earth game over
problem solved we don't have to worry
about any other kind of form of energy
fossil fuel or wind power solar power
will have fusion power highly efficient
very very cheap when the argument is
given to us that we must move from
fossil fuels to other kinds of energy
not to solve climate change but merely
to slow it down people are engaged in
prophecy what they're saying is that
there is no other alternative that the
knowledge to solve climate change will
not be created that we are in a moment
of stasis where the only possible
response to climate change is to make
things worse for just about everyone and
so it is kind of prophecy knowledge
growth is unlimited and we're going to
see that next chapter let me finish
reading this chapter and I'll get off my
high horse David writes that problems
are soluble does not mean that we
already know their solutions or can
generate them to order that would be
akin to creationism the biologist Peter
Medawar described science as the art of
the soluble but the same applies to all
forms of knowledge all kinds of creative
thought involved judgments about what
approaches might or might not work
gaining or losing interest in particular
problems or subproblems is part of the
creative process and itself constitutes
problem-solving so where the problems
are soluble does not depend on whether
any given question can be answered or
answered by any particular thinker on a
particular day but if progress ever
depended on violating a law of physics
then problems are soluble would be false
okay so that's the end of a window on
infinity and the next chapter is chapter
9 optimism I do apologize that this
particular episode took much longer to
produce and than any of the others as I
say this is a labor of love but I'm kind
of uh I'm kind of buoyed by the fact
that some of my favorite podcasts that
are out there actually I'm more
infrequent even than mine are so I'm
happy with the write but you know I'm
also happy to receive messages as I do
that people are encouraging me to make
these more frequently but I think we're
doing pretty well we're up to chapter 9
I've only been doing this for you know
close to a year so another year and
we'll we basically through the entire
book and then we'll be onto the fabric
of reality I'm going to I'm going to
just I'm not going to do chapter 9 now
but what I will release soon after this
episode is one about free will I think
that's going to be a diversion away from
the beginning of infinity just onto
something else I'm interested in we are
much shorter one on this but thanks for
watching or listening I hope it was
clear and I'll see you next time bye bye
[Music]